# The Probable Infinity of Nature and Life: Three Essays.

## By William Emerson Ritter.

### Director of the Scripps Institution for Biological Research of the University of California, La Jolla, California.

## Boston, 1918.

### Richard G. Badger, The Gorham Press.

To the Memory of Joseph LeConte

Who more than any other teacher helped me  
to look with the eye of Reason upon  
the Beauty, the Wonder, the  
Majesty, and the Mystery  
of Nature

# Foreword.

The essays constituting this booklet partake of the nature of ancient history in that all have been in manuscript several years. The oldest and longest, that on the question of the infinity of nature, was mostly written in 1912, but some of it still earlier. But the mere matter of dates does not show the full measure of the ancient history character of the ideas presented. Were I to treat the same topics systematically now, almost certainly a product considerably different from that actually presented would be the outcome. However, the basal conceptions would be the same; and history, even ancient history, has its intrinsic worths, one of these being that quite over and above all that is _said_ in the record, there is the fact of the place which the record holds in the time-series into which all similar records necessarily fall. To illustrate, the various chroniclings and meditatings and generalizings on the life of a people produced by many writers and scattered through many years and centuries, constitute a history --- a sort of super-history --- of the writers. Indeed, to the student of evolution in the truly organic sense, this super-history may almost be said to be more important than the written record. The student of man's efforts to interpret the organic world of which he is a part may well find more interest in the question of why and how Milton produced such a story as that of the Creation and Fall of Man than in anything actually contained in the story. From this standpoint the story may interest him as keenly, may mean as much to him, as does Darwin's attempt to account for man's origin.

It is almost as much on account of the super-history furnished by these essays as on account of what is said in them that I am now publishing them. They were not written with any definite purpose of publication. The ones on spontaneous generation and multiple causes were prepared as addresses for scientific societies. That on the infinity of nature was written mainly to enable me to see where my biological development was tending as touching other domains of knowledge. To state more specifically why I now publish the essays essentially as they were written, I find on approaching the completion of the _Unity of the Organism_, that I need the essays in print, partly as record and partly as super-record. What I am writing now in the larger work, I want to attach directly to what I wrote earlier about the "origin of life" and to do so without rewriting the old essay and incorporating it as a section in the later book.

The chief present significance, as I now see, of the essays as super-record, lies in the stage of development exhibited of the organismal hypothesis of consciousness in which the _Unity of the Organism_ culminates. If any of my readers become seriously interested in that hypothesis, they will quite surely be interested to know just how the conceptions of conscious psychic life set forth in the discussion of that hypothesis, are a growth and differentiation from conceptions set forth in the essay on the infinity of nature. And such readers may be approximately as much interested as I am in the fact that what is said in the older essay had lain unread and largely forgotten as to details from 1912 to 1918.

# Are We Obliged to Suppose That the Spontaneous Origin of Life Ever Occurred?*

I have no new facts to present on this much-belabored subject. This admission may seem to disqualify me for a Sigma Xi address, the usual understanding being that such an address should be based on experimental investigations by the speaker himself. So my venture raises an interesting question: May a scientific study be original and useful even though it deals entirely with old and well-known observations and experiments? Does scientific research consist in the discovery and announcement of concrete facts, and in that alone?

*) Written as an address for the University of California scientific society, Sigma Xi, and read before the California chapter in 1914, and the Texas chapter in 1916.

The view expressed by Claude Bernard that "Science does not consist in facts, but in the conclusions which we draw from them," is, I think, held by all men of science. But the view carries an important implication which seems to be little noticed, namely, that if generalizations and conclusions are as essential to science as are facts, then they, as such, need critical examination just as objective facts do. This means, stated briefly, that critical, consistent science must examine its own knowledge-getting processes no less carefully than it examines facts. It means that science needs theories of knowledge --- at least of its own kind of knowledge --- no less than it needs theories of nature.

Failure by men of science to recognize clearly the distinction indicated is responsible, in my judgment, for much confused thinking in science. The problem in hand is a conspicuous example of this confusion. When biologists affirm that the spontaneous generation of life at some time somewhere is a logical necessity of the evolution theory, they appear not to see that the affirmation really concerns not a theory of _nature_, but a theory of the _knowledge_ of nature.

I believe, therefore, that an examination of prevailing views on the query which is our subject is as essentially scientific as an experimental research to the same end. And I feel the more justified in dealing with the problem thus, in that all who have discussed it during the last forty years, more or less, have really had to go on much the same observational basis. Objective discovery has contributed exceedingly little to the solution of the problem since the great controversy of the Pasteur-Pouchet period, culminating in Tyndall's memoir of 1875, ended in the complete overthrow of the theory of spontaneous generation as then held. It will be safe to assume that everybody admits that the dictum, _Omne vivum ex vivo_, stands on as secure an inductive foundation as do the doctrines of gravitation and of conservation of energy, so far as the life of today is concerned. Like these it has stood the severest of all tests, that of unlimited application in the affairs of civilized mankind. Every piece of canned food the preservation of which depends on hermetic closure after the expulsion or sterilization of air, and every aseptic surgical operation are confirmations of the dictum.

These preliminaries lead to a closer formulation of the problem as we are to treat it: How comes it that a great number of scientific men believe that something has taken place in nature when there is not a particle of direct evidence that it has taken place, while on the contrary, there is a vast body of evidence tending to prove that it has not taken place? Exception may be taken to the statement that there is no direct evidence in support of the hypothesis that the living has ever originated genuinely _de novo_ from the non-living. I must consequently justify the assertion. What I have to say will be assembled around a distinction between direct and indirect evidence. The direct evidence is derived from immediate observation upon, or experience with the production of living beings. All the evidence we have of this sort, and I reiterate my reference to its vastness, is that organisms always come into existence from preceding organisms of their own kind. All the evidence of _biology proper_ is to this purport. By indirect evidence I mean evidence derived from observation and reasoning on certain aspects of organisms _other_ than those of their mode of coming into existence. The most important kinds of indirect evidence are chemico-physical, and pertain chiefly to the chemical composition of organisms, the metabolic processes taking place within them, and certain of their corporeal activities.

It would be possible to show by several lines of consideration, that almost all chemico-physical studies on organisms bear only _indirectly_, so far as they bear at all, on the problem of the ultimate origin of life. But it will suffice to point out that such studies scarcely touch the central point of the problem. They ignore that attribute of organisms in virtue of which they give rise to others of the same kind. I say this with the whole round of such highly interesting researches as those on artificial parthenogenesis in mind. The experiments in this field always begin, bear in mind, with the ripe or nearly ripe germ-cells, and these, do not forget, are _derived from some organism_. As to how these germ-cells came into existence, the researches never so much as ask, nor do they throw the faintest direct light on the question. Their aim is to show not how the egg came to exist, but, once it does exist, what it may be made to do and how it does it.

Of course investigators in this realm know well enough how distant and round-about and inferential is the road from observation on the reproductive cells of an animal, to conclusions touching the primal origin of animals generally; but from all we gather it is clear that the unschooled in the ways of nature and in the methods of science do not understand this. On behalf of health and sobriety in the general intelligence of the community relative to biological matters, teachers of science ought to show pupils the vast chasm that yawns between observations on development of a sea-urchin's eggs, to illustrate, and conclusions as to how sea-urchins, to say nothing about all other animals, arose in the first instance. There is a considerable body of _indirect knowledge_ which is undoubtedly more or less favorable to the hypothesis of the origin of living beings at some time, somewhere, without the intermediation of prior living beings. Let us look at some of this knowledge.

Certain mixtures of inorganic ingredients, as heavy oil and pulverized salts, potassium bichromate for example, present structural features and movements both of locomotion and internal change closely resembling the structure and activities of such simple beings as the amoeba and the slime moulds. From this one is impelled to ask, may it not be possible by sufficient patience in this mixing of non-living substances to finally hit upon a combination whose likeness to living substance would be so close as to be wholly indistinguishable from it --- in a word, so close as to be really identical with it? If such a combination could be found by artifice, why not suppose that it might have been chanced upon by nature in the long and ceaseless course of the translocations and interactions that are so characteristic of nature?

Again, great numbers of compounds, as urea, sugars, fats, even proteids, are now produced in the chemical laboratory by processes wholly unconnected with those taking plcuie in the bodies of living beings. If then by such relatively simple inorganic means the processes of life may be so far duplicated, is it not reasonable to suppose that in nature, with its vastly greater resources and its heedlessness of time, similar inorganic operations might have accomplished much more, --- might indeed have gone the whole way and produced not only various essential constituents of living beings, but the beings themselves? Such reasoning has plausibility, even conclusive force with many minds, particularly with minds that are not over-critical and already in the possession of general theories to which the reasoning is congenial.

Taking account of all the evidence bearing on the question of the origin of life, two quite different conclusions are indicated: 1. that organisms have always originated from parents, 2. that somewhere and at some time, some organisms have originated without parents.

Do not fail to notice at this point the real inwardness of the familiar assertion that it is "logically necessary" to suppose life originated _de novo_ sometime, and I wish this appeal to logic might reveal to us workers in objective science the peril in the habit of falling back on logic. It is logically necessary to suppose life originated in time if our reasoning starts from premises that makes it necessary, but not otherwise. Logic has to do primarily with the concatenation of ideas, that is, with creations of the mind; and only secondarily with the creations of nature. The attempt to make nature genuinely subject to a system of logic is the very essence of all subjectivistic philosophies, and for scientific men to pursue investigations on living beings under guidance of the belief that such beings originated in a specified way, because logic demands that they should so originate, is to cast inductive science out of the laboratory window and enthrone deductive science in its place.

So far as logic is concerned, two courses are open as touching the question of the origin of life. 1. We may investigate the phenomena of living beings without making any formal hypothesis as to whether there was a time in the remote past when no such beings existed. 2. If we decide that an hypothesis is desirable, we have the choice between two hypotheses. a. We can make an hypothesis that they actually did begin, in the fullest meaning of the word, at some time, or b. that they have always arisen much as we see them arising now. We may choose between these two hypotheses: Organisms began, truly, in time; or the time during which they have been coming into existence as we now see them doing, is of endless length. Or stating the alternatives in language not involving the word "time," we have: a. Some organisms have arisen without parents; or b. the succession of organisms standing in the relation of parent to offspring is of endless continuance.

My views as to what biology had best do about the two courses above indicated is: Some hypothesis is desirable as a guide and stimulus to research. Indeed unreserved commitment to the evolution doctrine almost necessitates this. As between the two hypotheses open to us, I believe that of the endless continuance in the past of the production of organisms by parents would better be adopted as our "working hypothesis." The superior claim of this hypothesis over the other is distinct enough when the usual tests are applied for determining the relative values of rival hypotheses. The endless-succession hypothesis is favored over the no-parent hypothesis by the positive evidence bearing on the case; by the nature of the difficulties in the way of establishing each; and by the relative usefulness of each. To show why the endless-succession hypothesis is more tenable and better is the main aim of this address.

First as to the positive, observational evidence in the case. I have already called attention to the secure place in science of the dictum _omne vivum ex vivo_. The full weight of the evidence on which this rests is hardly appreciated even by biologists, and I am convinced that it cannot be justly appraised without a closer critique of the nature of observational evidence than we are wont to make. Into such a critique it is impossible to go at length now. I must be satisfied to assert in an apparently dogmatic way that if one sees clearly not only the _difference_, but also the _relation_ between the inductive and the deductive methods in science, he will see that the simply enormous body of direct evidence to the effect that organisms come into existence from parents and in no other way, far outweighs the indirect evidence that some may have arisen without parents, and that it also out-weighs the _a priori_ difficulties presented by the fact that this positive evidence points to a literally endless succession of parents and offspring.

I would like to call your attention to an historic aspect of the controversy not often attended to. All man's reasonings about nature, no matter how crude, contain an _a priori_, or hypothetical element, so that all real advance in knowledge of nature, in science, involves the testing and correcting of preconceptions. In earlier ages men's reasonings concerning the origin of living beings found no difficulty in the notion that plants and animals might arise without parents; so the effect of the whole course of investigation touching this aspect of organisms has been one of correcting earlier conceptions on this subject. The contemporaries of Virgil and Ovid had no difficulty in accepting the view that bees arise from the flesh of bullocks, frogs from slime, and mice from old rags. Harvey's declaration that all animals come from eggs, and Redi's denial that maggots are generated by decaying meat, were vigorously combatted. Historically as well as factually the "logical necessity" felt today that some living beings must have come from things not living, _is a remnant of the earlier necessity felt by everybody for believing that almost all living beings must (or might) come from non-living things_.

The relative difficulties in the way of the two hypotheses we will now examine more closely. Consider the more general difficulty first. To many persons the conception of a truly endless succession of parents and offspring seems more difficult than that of a succession actually beginning at some time in the past, so the former is forthwith rejected in favor of the latter. Arrhenius has indicated the direction in which the answer to this question lies, though he has not, to my knowledge, considered it in detail. We can as well become accustomed, he says, to think of the eternity of life as of the eternity of matter. I would maintain that the supposed necessity of accepting the idea that matter is eternal, but of rejecting the idea that life is eternal is a _mere habit of thought_ --- a kind of determination which no scientific man would defend. There is unquestionably great difficulty in getting a clear conception of a succession of organisms related to one another as parent to offspring, extending through infinite time; but the difficulty is not different in fundamentals from that of getting a clear, scientific conception of the infinity of nature in any of its aspects. Custom and a sort of intellectual laziness enable us to speak the words "eternity of matter" glibly enough. But as long as any mental alertness remains to us, we may jolt ourselves out of our thought-siesta on this subject by querying: Under _what form_ has matter existed from all eternity? For example, have oxygen and iron and phosphorus existed from all eternity just as we see them today? I do not ask these questions with any expectation, even with any desire that anybody will be ready with an absolute answer. All I am concerned about is that you shall reflect upon the relative difficulties in the conceptions that the oxide of iron, for instance, has existed forever while organic beings must have begun, actually _de novo_, sometime, somewhere. The difficulty in the case of the infinite series of organisms is surely different from that presented by the infinite series in inorganic nature, but the difference is only an extension of the difference between the living and the non-living all along the line. To those who think on problems of nature in a truly scientific way, the "greater difficulty" argument against the so-called "pansparma" hypothesis can have no weight.

The second difficulty is that presented by the problem, not of how life began anywhere whatever, but of how it began on our earth. A sharp distinction between these two problems is necessitated by the present state of knowledge in the three fields of astronomy, chemistry, and biology. There is, it would seem, ample ground on which to rest the hypothesis that living beings exist on many celestial bodies as well as on our own. But how strong is the evidence in support of the schoolbook pronouncement that "at some time in prehistoric ages the first living thing appeared from a source which was not living"? I believe that an impartial consideration of all facts does not warrant any such pronouncement. No really critical biologist would put it into an elementary text-book, nor teach it in any way, but least of all to beginners in biology. I would insist that the difficulties in the way of understanding how life began on earth have no more right to impose a limitation on our belief as to the origin of organisms from parents, than the difficulties in the way of understanding how gravitation could act in an absolute vacuum have a right to impose a limitation on our belief of the universal attraction of bodies. The assumptions that the spontaneous origin of life does not take place in nature now because the conditions of the earth are unfavorable for it, but that in some past time the conditions were favorable, so that the thing actually did occur, are not warranted by the facts. The limiting conditions for the maintenance and propagation of organic beings as we actually know them, justify to my mind, the supposition that if ever living things arose _de novo_ from non-living things they may do so now. Consider the matter of temperature which is allowed to be one of the most important of all the environmental conditions of organisms. The average above which organisms are killed by heat is usually taken as about 40° C., and there seems no good ground for supposing that temperatures favorable for the _maintenance_ of life should not also be favorable for the primal origination of life, if such be in any wise possible. The assumption frequently made that the higher general temperatures of the earth which are believed to have obtained in earlier geological ages would be more favorable than the present temperature conditions for the original production of organic beings from inorganic substances, appears to be quite gratuitous.

The basal chemico-physical processes of organisms such as photo-sjmthesis, enzymic action, protoplasmic movement, and cell-division, proceed most typically at temperatures ranging from 10° or 12° C. to 20° or 25° C., and perhaps 30° or 35° C., these being ordinary temperatures on many parts of the earth. And what real reasons have we for supposing that conditions of light, oxygen, water, and salt, favorable for supporting life, should not also be favorable for the primal origination of it? So far as I can see, the only reason offered by the protagonists of the primal-favoring-conditions hypothesis is that the evidence at hand is not favorable for such origin now. If living beings have ever arisen from non-living substances, they may reasonably be supposed to be doing so at present. If this reasoning is correct, it would seem as though the natural conditions favorable for such mode of origination might be reproduced in the laboratory.

Conceived in this way the problem of "spontaneous generation" is quite different from that which occupied the attention of Pouchet, Liebig, Pasteur, Tyndall, and others of their period. These investigators were aiming to determine whether living beings may appear in culture media containing organic substances of one kind and another, if sources of germ _inoculation of these media be rigidly excluded_. The experiments of that era were not, it must be recognized, devised for the purpose of testing the possibility of the origin of organic beings in solutions containing _only_ the _inorganic elements_ essential to the constitution of the organisms. This is the problem that Dr. H. Charlton Bastian worked at for years; and however much or little reliance may be placed on his manipulations and conclusions, it would seem that his main idea as to object and method is sound, and that if the problem is to be solved at all, it will have to be attacked in accordance with this general plan. Bastian made solutions in distilled water of sodium silicate (or more recently, of colloidal silica), ammonic phosphate, phosphoric acid and iron pernitrate. Small quantities of these he placed in glass tubes which he sealed and subjected to temperatures of from 100° C. to 135° C. Then he exposed the tubes to ordinary daylight or direct sunlight at room temperatures for varying periods of time, extending to several months. His results are altogether too remarkable to be accepted at once by any even half critical biologist. The Royal Society refused to publish his later work, and if he never presented anything more convincing than what is contained in papers published elsewhere, he really had no ground for feeling himself unjustly treated. In the first place, he fell far short of proving that the objects he got were organisms. They were almost entirely motionless according to his own account. Although they are said to have "multiplied," no detailed description of anything like cell-division is given. The photographic figures furnished in abundance show many things which resemble organisms, but structural details are almost wholly lacking. Finally, while he got what he called bacteria, torulae, and even fungi of familiar species, he supposed silicon to replace carbon in their chemical make-up, since, as it will be noticed, the compounds with which he starts make no provision for this element. Nevertheless, if one is going to prove the origin of organic beings from inorganic substances, he must start with inorganic substances. This is so obviously sound that several English bio-chemists are turning their attention to the matter, and it is greatly to be hoped that the whole field will be worked over with the thoroughness which the importance and intricacy of the subject demands, and modem laboratory facilities and methods are able to furnish.

Looking at the problem of the _de novo_ origin of living beings from the standpoint of biology proper, that is, from the standpoint of _living_ organisms, I do not see how the methods of ordinary chemical manipulation can get solid basis even for making a start toward its solution. I have never understood how chemists could see in the fact of their ability to produce in the laboratory some or all the compounds which they may get from organic beings, ground for hoping that by these methods they might prove that living beings could arise in nature from inorganic substances, or that it might be possible to produce living beings by similar means. To reason that because it is possible to produce in the laboratory the chemical compounds found in organic beings, it may be possible to produce the living organisms from which these compounds are derived, is not unlike reasoning that because it is possible to produce in the laboratory compounds taken from the earth, it may be possible to produce an earth in the laboratory. The similarity between these cases is by no means far-fetched. In order to produce any natural object you have to produce all its attributes. The attribute of the earth which makes the suggestion to produce an earth artificially seem ridiculous is its size. But really when you reflect, are not the difficulties in the way of producing the attributes of the organism in virtue of which it is alive about as insurmountable as are those in the way of producing the size of the earth? To make this query concrete, consider what would be involved in producing artificially the attribute by virtue of which organisms propagate their kind. The fact should never be neglected that heredity as a biological conception implies not merely that each individual organism has the ability to produce, or participate in producing, another of its kind, but that it itself was produced by another of its kind. How are you going to produce artificially an object, one of the main attributes of which is that of being produced by another object of its own kind? Put in that form, the problem manifestly involves an absurdity. As far as concerns practical solution it is much the same as that of producing perpetual motion; that is, of producing a machine capable of at the same time using up and keeping its own substance and energy ; in other words, the familiar problem of lifting one's self by his boot straps.

The way this difficulty is avoided by those who still cling to the spontaneous generation hypothesis is very instructive. Different writers pursue different courses. In the first place there are those who hold, as G. H. Lewes did, that "the link which unites all organisms is not always the common bond of heritage, but the uniformity of organic laws acting under uniform conditions"; that heredity is, in other words, not an original and essential attribute of organisms, or at least of organic matter, but something acquired in the course of evolution after the first organic compounds had arisen. This seems to be Bastian's view. It is also held by Professor Benjamin Moore and undoubtedly by many other biochemists and physiologists. It would be interesting to know how a biologist who holds this view would convince himself and his biological colleagues that a particular substance was genuinely living if it could not grow and reproduce. Is it not exactly here that Bastian's enterprise foundered?

Again there are those, like Jacques Loeb, who while regarding heredity as a truly primal attribute of organisms, still put it aside as presenting no great obstacle. In his book, _The Mechanical Conception of Life_, Loeb says that "fertilization and heredity... are specific for living organisms and without analogues in inanimate nature." The key inquiry concerning this view is: If heredity is specific for living organisms, is it also specific for the most fundamental of the _living_ materials of organisms? It seems to me a great deal of confused thinking has resulted from the prevalent habit of speaking of "living matter," "organic substance" and so on, as though these were something quite apart from or antecedent to organisms. The very conception of "living" or "organic" substance is, as I understand, substance found in living beings. To apply the term living to substances which had never been in any way dependent upon a living being would be to deprive the word of its most fundamental meaning. Suppose, for example, an inorganic colloid were to be produced so similar to some living colloid substance as to be indistinguishable from it in any observable attribute. I fail to see how it could be pronounced living, imtil it should have proved itself capable of cooperating and interacting with other substances to make a living being. These are common-place, homely truths, but not to be denied or ignored because common-place.

It would seem as though we must either recast our conception of living beings by leaving out one of the group of attributes hitherto regarded as most fundamental and definitive, that of reproduction and heredity, or give up all thought of a _de novo_ origin of life by either natural or artificial means. I am far from denying that such a revision of the definition of organism may be necessary; but I insist that we not only need not, but in strict fidelity to the inductive method of research, cannot so revise it at the behest of any amount of speculation on the spontaneous origin of living beings. We can do so only after objects have been produced from inorganic substances which are living beyond all cavil; that is, have stood the test of all the main criteria of such beings.

Let us now examine briefly a great body of facts which seem to have a bearing on the questions of what shall be accounted as truly living substance, and of the relation of such substance to the attribute of heredity. I refer to the rapidly accumulating evidence that the individuality of each organism extends down to the details of its chemical make-up. We are still far from proof that every organism is through and through chemically different from every other organism. Indeed, we are sure that many organisms widely separated in the animal and plant kingdoms yield, upon chemical analysis, many identical or closely similar substances. But there is a strong movement in several quite remote and distinct fields of biology favorable to the conception that every organism is in some measure genuinely different from every other organism. To this, many, perhaps a majority, of biologists would agree.

A final outcome of this must be, I believe, though in this view few present-day bio-chemists would concur, that biology will have to recognize that the living organism literally uses, as common sense says it does, the substances which enter into it to produce the structural elements and the energies it needs. In other words, the living organism presses into its own service, and impresses something of its own nature upon the material, organic and inorganic, which it takes in from the external world; so that the concept "living substance," taken in its most essential sense, means a substance produced not only by the living organism, but also by some individual organism. If the word _cause_ be used consistently it will have to be recognized that the organism is a cause of its own living substance just as truly as the inorganic nutrient substances are causes of the organism.

The indubitable natural history fact that organisms are not only manufacturers, but are originators, even original originators, as one may say, furnishes a base for another line of reflection on the problem of creating life artificially. The chemist can accomplish with his sex-glands and with various other internal glands and organs what he can not possibly accomplish with his hands or his brain, or both working together. The brain is the brain, the liver is the liver, the testicle is the testicle, and by no possibility can either fully supplant any of the others, for the good and sufficient reason that each one is real in exactly the same sense that every other one is; that the existence of each is just as ultimate, just as fundamental as is the existence of the others. Man can originate some things in nature but he cannot originate every thing in nature, for the reason that vast portions of nature are already originated. He cannot, for example, originate water in a final sense for water already exists. Once having water in his hands and having taken it to pieces, he can put the parts together and so by _imitation_, can in a secondary sense originate water. Exactly so with organic beings, or Life. To expect to originate Life in the deeper sense would be to expect to originate attributes of the relation of the inorganic constituents of organisms that have already been originated. What a chemist might reasonably strive to do, that is strive for in strict accordance with the principles and methods of chemical synthesis, would be first to make a complete chemical analysis of some simple living being, say some bacterium, and then to put the parts together again in such a way as to make either the identical bacterium, or one of different but closely similar kind or species. We may look upon Woehler's famous achievement of synthesizing urea as the first step toward effecting the chemical manufacture of living men; but I submit, success in manufacturing one of the simplest constituents of one of the body's excretions is a rather long distance from success in manufacturing living beings. And here is the practical, one might say, the industrial aspect of this matter: Supposing organic chemistry should some day have advanced so far as to enable the manufacturing chemist to manufacture men, what would chemistry really have accomplished? The principle of substitution and imitation by which synthetic chemistry is virtually limited would make it impossible to do more than produce men exactly like those already in existence, or at best only a little different from these. This might be greatly important from a sociological standpoint; and it would be very interesting scientifically, but the achievement could hardly rank among the great scientific _discoveries_. It would be a remarkable feat of synthetic chemistry in the ordinary industrial sense, but nothing greater than that. It would not be creative chemistry in the sense of creating a new elementary substance or even new attributes of an old substance, to which, be it noticed, the views here expressed would make the "artificial production of life" comparable.

We shall have to recognize, as previously remarked, that the problem of producing life artificially is very much like that of producing perpetual motion. Logically both are possible or impossible depending on the conceptions and definitions with which one starts. Practically one seems just about as possible as the other.

I come now to the part of the discussion which seems to me most important; that of the relative usefulness of the two possible hypotheses stated at the beginning concerning the origin of life. One is that occasionally and somewhere organisms have been, perhaps now are, produced without parents. The other says that all organisms always have been and still are produced by parents. I verily believe, as already stated, the last-mentioned hypothesis will soon be recognized as more useful than the other. The superior usefulness which I would claim for the no-beginning-no-ending hypothesis would be two fold. 1. It would serve the ends of biological research and biological thinking and teaching better than the alternative hypothesis; and 2. it would tend to influence advantageously the sciences of inorganic nature.

Concerning its salutary effect on biology I speak only in general terms. Speaking thus, its effect would be quite similar to that of reaching a perception of the order of inorganic nature that convinces one of the futility of searching for perpetual motion. In the same way that the physical and mechanical sciences were vitiated by false theories and harassed by futile enterprises about energy and machines so long as false notions prevailed about the creation of matter and energy, so the organic sciences are even yet vitiated by sundry false theories and are harassed by futile research enterprises on account of the lingering belief in the spontaneous and possible artificial creation of life.

Several biologists seem to have a feeling of chagrin at the continued defeat of efforts to explain life, to say nothing of attempts to produce it. It seems to them that to be obliged to admit the impossibility of the origin of the living from the non-living, would be to admit that at this one point a break occurs in the continuity of nature which is wholly unlike that known to occur anywhere else. Obviously a clear grasp of the hypothesis of the endlessness of the series of organisms would do away with this feeling by establishing the conception of the continuity of origination, not as between the inorganic and the organic, but within the organic itself. Nor should anyone fail to remember that a continuity of another sort than that of origination is fully established between the inorganic and the organic by the dependence of all organisms, finally, on inorganic nature for nutriment.

When we come to see that our dealings with objective nature must be on the basis of the attributes of natural objects, we shall see that there is everywhere in nature a sort of discontinuity just as essential as is continuity. The discontinuity which would result from proof of the non-origin of the organic from the inorganic, would be no more than the recognition of one more of this class of discontinuities. I refer to the discontinuities which pertain to the relation among the attributes of a body. We have no certain proof of the convertibility of certain attributes into any other attributes. The attributes of extension and color, for example, or shape and odor, while in a sense dependent on each other, are not in any sense derivable from each other. Now, if we can get no evidence of the origin of the living from the non-living, that fact will ipso facto, make the group of attributes of living bodies a group non-derivable from the attributes of inorganic bodies taken as such; exactly as the attribute of gravitation, which is common to all bodies, is non-derivable from any of the other attributes of these bodies.

In so far as the mental need for the principle of continuity in nature is legitimate, that is, in so far as that need is dependent upon the constitution of our minds, the need ought to be satisfied so far as organic nature is concerned by the continuity which manifests itself in the growth and development of the individual, and in nutrition and propagation. If we must indeed recognize that organisms possess some attributes which can not be derived in the usual sense from inorganic bodies, there is no more reason for being chagrined at the fact than there is for being chagrined at the fact that we cannot derive redness from weight, or iron from silver.

I am trying to express quite dogmatically a view according to which it would come to pass that, were our mental attitude toward the limitableness or illimitableness of the system of nature to be determined by the usual methods of scientific induction instead of by habit of thought, the hypothesis of the infinitude of the various series would win the day. It would win because, while we could never expect absolutely to prove its truth, we should see that its warrantableness as against that of its competitor, the finitude of the series, rests upon exactly the same foundations as does our confidence in the part of the series actually in our possession.

These last sentences remind us of the close and everywhere manifest kindred between the organic and inorganic worlds, if by any possibility we have become unmindful of the relation. The next essay in this volume will show how the conception of the illimitableness of living nature has affected the thinking of at least one biologist as touching the limitableness, or otherwise, of non-living nature.

# Are There Sufficient Reasons for Belief in the Infinity of Nature?

## 1\.

In his interesting lecture, "The Fundamental Properties of the Elements,"* Professor T. W. Richards said: "They, the atomic weights of the chemical elements, are the mute witnesses of the first beginnings of the cosmos out of the chaos." Such a setting-over as this of the cosmos against the chaos by a foremost student in a realm of nature particularly calculated to elicit the most careful thought and expression on such matters, somewhat startled me by its Miltonian sound. In recent years Milton's mighty poem has afforded me greater pleasure than at any other period of my life; but concomitantly with my growing appreciation of the daring flights of poetic imagination there shown, as a student of nature the conception of a chaos in the far-distant past, out of which a cosmos emerged after a while, has gradually and at last entirely faded from my mind, and I had presumed such to be the case with men of science generally.

*) _Nature_, July 6, 1911, p. 29.

I do not suppose Professor Richards would, if pressed to elucidate his words, affirm his belief in a time when the "earth was waste and void" in the Mosaic sense and when there existed, "...a dark Illimitable ocean, without bound, without dimension, where length, breadth, and height, and time and place are lost; where eldest night and Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold Eternal anarchy." Even the less exuberantly fanciful Chaos of Hesoid held to be a "yawning abyss composed of Void,* Mass, and Darkness," could hardly appeal to the curbed and guided imagination of present-day science.

*) This very early attempt to make Nothing do positive service in explaining the origin of Something, ought to interest those who at the present day pin faith to an "Absence" that can "dominate" a "Presence" as solid ground on which to base an explanation of certain facts on heredity.

I had supposed the view of students who think into these problems as far as our present scientific knowledge enables us to go, is not that there was once a real _orderless_ state of things, but that the _kind_ of order with which physicists, chemists, biologists, and the rest are now dealing was rather fundamentally different long ago from what it is today. I had supposed that natural science at its best has now carried the analysis of the idea of chaos, or disorder so far as to recognize that, as Bergson remarks, it "represents nothing at all," and that "the problems that have been raised around it vanish." In a word, that a man of science, when on duty as such, would have no such word as chaos in his vocabulary. But having recently come upon expressions by a number of excellent scientific men similar in import to this by Richards, I am led to question whether science has, after all, fully extricated itself from imaginings akin to those set forth by Milton. If the question be raised whether it is worth while for sober men of science to deal with such matters, we need do little more than remind ourselves that the question of worth-whileness is beside the point, since every science in common with all knowledge, taken as a whole does inevitably, sooner or later, run into the vast problem of the beginnings of things. This is seen to be so whether the subject be viewed historically or operatively. Men guess as automatically and universally as they observe, or walk, or whistle. That is, the attribute of prevision --- of trying to see on ahead --- seems as primal in man as the attribute of vision --- of seeing what is before one here and now. At least a few leading men have been making hypotheses, or what is the same thing, thoughtful guesses, as long as there have been leaders, and as long as these leaders have been doing anything. The practical question is only as to how thoughtful and careful the guesses shall be --- as to how wide a range of the germane facts shall be made the basis of the guesses.

## 2\.

Being a biologist, my approach to this vast problem of beginnings has naturally been from the domain of living beings. I am convinced that the hypothesis of a once-for-all beginning of organisms, of the origin of the Living from the Not-living, though hallowed by ages of theological speculation and poetic imagination, and more recently, given the prestige of highly respectable scientific authority, is no longer a fruitful hypothesis either for science or common intelligence. Before the invincible march of observational inquiry it has gone, or is rapidly going, the way of such problems as that of perpetual motion.

_Omne vivum ex vivo_ has come to stand in biology along side of gravitation in the physical sciences generally as one of the most securely established of the laws of nature. Tyndall wrote in the late seventies of last century, "I here affirm that no shred of trustworthy experimental testimony exists to prove that life, in our day, has ever appeared independently of antecedent life." It looks as though we must cut the "in our day" from this pronouncement and take the rest as a negative way of stating our "working hypothesis" of the continuity of living beings. I have dealt with this problem in the first essay of this book, so do no more with it here. My purpose now is to present a few reflections on what would follow the serious adoption of the hypothesis that physical life is infinite as bearing on the question of a former state of universal chaos, i. e., of orderlessness.

What do we mean by orderless? Surely the absence of order. It is perhaps safe to assume that among the more intelligent of our day, no form of sophistication is so general as to need reckoning with, that will attempt to make anything else of it. The real question is, then, exactly what do we mean by order? Followed up rigorously the question plunges down to the deepest rootlets of our observational knowledge and so, in one aspect, of all knowledge whatever. Being in the biological realm and fixing attention on the somewhat special application of the term taxonomy, let us look a bit at what we really do when we taxonomize. According to Huxley's well approved statement we systematize and generalize the "facts of morphology in such a manner as to arrange living beings in groups according to their degrees of likeness."

Most of the weight of this statement rests on three phrases, "living beings," "facts of Morphology," and "degrees of likeness." Notice what is implied in these phrases. "_Living_ beings," that is, objects in nature distinguished from not-living objects --- How? By the possession of properties, or qualities, or traits, or characteristics, or attributes, which non-living objects do not possess. For example, living objects have the attribute of metabolism (to select the one about which, perhaps, there would be least question as to distinctiveness). Obviously here is implied a still deeper taxonomic performance, one reaching _outside_ the biological realm, and resting again on the same basis, as does taxonomizing within that realm, namely, on the properties, or qualities, or attributes of objects generally.

"Facts of Morphology" are what observation discovers concerning the form-attributes of living beings; and if arranging is done as strictly on a morphological basis as the Huxleyan definition would have it (which is by no means necessary) the "degrees of likeness" are always recognized through a comparison of formattributes of the organisms arranged. In a word, no matter where one turns in nature he finds that all the knowledge he has, rests upon, as a _sine qua non_, the qualities, or attributes of objects. And further, when one comes to compare all the objects thus recognized, there are found likenesses and differences enough to enable him to arrange them in numerous groups and sub-groups. The possibility of _any knowledge whatever_ of nature rests upon the _attributes of objects_. And it so turns out that of all the prodigious number of observations thus far made and fully verified, no object has yet been found that does not possess a considerable number of attributes common to all other objects. All have shape of some sort; all have resistance to some extent; all, seemingly, affect light rays in one way and another; all have weight, and so on. In other words, a genuine chaos would seem to imply a genuine incorporealness; and a genuine incorporealness would be a genuine nothingness.

It may be there are still a few chemists, or rather, at heart alchemists or pseudo-chemists, who speak seriously about propertiless atoms or substances. What we need to see more clearly than we usually do is that such atoms are not sufficiently disposed of by recognizing them to be merely nothings; but that the conception of them implies a _negation of all observational knowledge_, and of all inductive science.

## 3\.

One can hardly notice too attentively the extent to which progress in the knowledge of nature, particularly in its minuter sub-divisions, has consisted in discovering attributes of bodies which were not before known to belong to them; and which are of the same general piece as attributes well known because of being possessed by other more easily observed bodies. And Dr. Richards' contention that the hypothesis of the compressibility of atoms is more in accord with all the relevant facts than the opposite hypothesis, seems to me to be a notable step in the general direction of such progress.

Assuming enough has been said to justify the adoption of the hypothesis that there is no real existence in the whole universe, that does not consist in, or depend directly upon bodies, which are in turn dependent upon their attributes; and recognizing the indubitable fact that the whole history and substance of science has always involved and now involves the discovery of new bodies having various attributes of previously known bodies and new attributes of old bodies; and recognizing ever more clearly and widely resemblances and differences between all known bodies both old and new, what follows as to the problem of the beginning in time and the limitation in space of the order of things with which we are already so largely familiar, and beside which we have no trustworthy knowledge whatever? This is one of the most scientifically and philosophically interesting, because most practically important, questions that can be raised.

It seems to me that if we hold rigorously to two of the best credentialed departments of human activity, namely, observational science and pure mathematics, the hypothetical or tentative answer to which we are driven is that the order of the universe had no beginning in time nor has any limitation in space; and further that this order admits of no such thing as "vacant space." In other words the conclusion pointed to is that the Cosmos, or Universe, or total order of things is genuinely infinite. By genuinely I mean infinite, not in the sense of subjectivist metaphysics or theology, but of physical science and mathematics. A short description or characterization of the Cosmos from this standpoint would be that it consists of an infinite number of bodies each belonging to an infinite series and that of all these bodies everyone has some attributes in common with all the others, but not one is exactly alike any other.* Undoubtedly such a conception is somewhat difficult to domesticate, as one might say. That is, it is not easily established on a footing of harmony, in the household of common ideas and sentiments and feelings. But there are certain general reflections which help toward such establishment. One of these concerns the distinction between vastness, and illimitableness or infinity. We may, indeed constantly do, deal with things so vast in number or size that they quite baffle comprehension as this pertains to ordinary sensible objects. The earth, for instance, has a very different status in our understanding from a base-ball, even though we accept the one almost as fully as the other, not only as real but as a body of particular form and consistency; as, namely, a spherical, solid body. Taking the earth as such an object at once makes it limited --- gives it boundaries --- and no matter how large it may be, so long as all the information we have about it places it in the same genus with bodies easily compassed by our sense experiences, we take it with little or no cavil or intellectual jolt. It is merely something _like_ something else, only _much larger_. Our knowledge processes and our feelings are not fundamentally altered in passing from one very large, though limited, thing to another of the same type but still larger; or from one greatly numerous series to another still more numerous; or from one set of events reaching far back into the past and seemingly destined to extend into the distant future, to another similar set, extending still further backward and presumably reaching still further forward.

*) In a suggestive paper "The role of the concept of infinity in the work of Lucretius" (_Bull. Amer. Math. Soc._, April 1918, pp. 321) Professor C. J. Keyser has done a good service in emphasizing the fact that the infinity which Lucretius strove to grasp was one "of infinite multitude and infinite magnitude."

A very different mental state is experienced when we come upon something to which no limits can be assigned. Put yourself to the test this way: Here you sit beside that vast body of water, the Pacific Ocean. How many drops are there in it? Meaning by drop, a definite amount of water, you do not hesitate to say that although the number is so great that the combined lifetimes of the whole present population of the earth would hardly suffice to count them, still it is a mere matter of repetition and so would surely end sometime, since the ocean itself is not unlimited. Again suppose for the sake of argument that each drop of water, no matter how small, could be halved, and each half again halved, and so on, to the very limit of your manipulative ability but without finding any indication that you could not go on halving if only you had skill enough. All the positive evidence in your possession would indicate that you were on a truly endless road, that you were dealing with an infinite series. Do you not, then, find yourself in a very different state of mind toward the Pacific Ocean from what you experienced in the other case? I think so, and think you can see wherein the difference lies. In the case of the incomprehensibly large, though limited, number of drops of equal size no fundamentally contradictory or paradoxical situation was recognized. The other case, however, lands you in just such a situation. The body of water with which you began is limited, yet within that body there exists potentially an unlimited number of parts. How can a limited thing contain an unlimited number of parts? Although the unresolvable contradiction involved in this case is of itself distracting almost to madness, if you dwell upon it intently, you still can, in fact you do accept the situation with more or less complacency. More or less, I say, because the degree of complacency depends on the degree of clearness with which you see that your accepting or not accepting makes not the slightest difference for all practical purposes. The ocean is exactly the same whatever you do about it. Its waves keep coming ashore just the same; its blueness remains with no trace of change; its benign influence on the adjacent earth lying under the boiling August sun goes on without a hitch; it floats the ships and sustains its myriads of living creatures in exactly the same way whatever be your thoughts and sentiments about it. You may put the ocean to any use you care to, utterly regardless of intellectual muddles you get into by thinking about it. What more natural and rational course, then, than for you to accept the situation?

But suppose, following your bent toward philosophizing, you push your questioning still further. "Have I," you say, "done something cowardly or weak in turning my back on a difficulty?" "No," you assure yourself, "I certainly have not, because it was only when I was trying to handle the Pacific Ocean with one department of myself, namely, my reason, that I was in trouble. The moment I went at it in a commonsense fashion, that is, with my whole self, with all my capabilities and at the behest of all my interest, my difficulties were found to be no longer serious." By the very act of passing to a larger standpoint the difficulties were set aside, not destroyed, but rendered innocuous. _The totality of one's interests always furnishes a modus vivendi for conflicts between one's partial interests_. Since we live with our whole selves, while we reason with only a part of ourselves, we have the same obligation and the same power to put the bit on reason when reason no longer works with effectiveness and to the good of the whole, that we had at the outset to start reason going. Otherwise expressed, in our feelings, and in our emotional nature, we are ready to accept the idea that nature is infinite even though our reason balks somewhat at it. Why this is so we need not now inquire.* It must suffice for our present purpose to recognize the fact. But since reason has proved so useful in so many ways, may we not expect it to be of still farther service in this situation, even though it find itself balked so far as one particular line of its effort was concerned? Were the nature of water really found to be such that it could be thus divided into smaller parts ad infinitum, our general physical knowledge would warrant us in supposing that a body of water like the Pacific Ocean has qualities and powers latent in it, the full measure and meaning of which we mortals can not even guess.

*) The reader who would like to see these suggestions about the nature of our knowledge of the external world carried somewhat further may read my essay _The Higher Usefulness of Knowledge_ in the book having that title; and the chapters on psychic integration, particularly the one having the title _Sketch of an Organismal Theory of Consciousness_ in the _Unity of the Organism_. A theory of knowledge and of existence taking its cue from the fragmentary conceptions presented in these writings, is a task for the future and for some one having more time and a better equipment for it than I have. But it may be of some interest to state here in a short paragraph what, as it seems to me, the finished product of such a task would be like. It would be an account or a description of man's total reaction towards the totality of things, such reaction resulting from his being an integrated and so essential element in that totality --- whatever the size of it may be. The integration of man, physical and psychical, with the whole system of the universe seems to be somewhat similar to the integration of the purely physical universe through the principle of gravitation. But since the integrating principle for man is physico-chemical quite as much as it is rational and so involves man's physical, instinctive and emotional quite as much as his rational nature, the account would be an emotionalizedrational or a rationalized-emotional one as you choose to characterize it. It would resemble considerably the better theologies of the past. It would, however, differ sharply from these in that the tentative or hypothetical parts of the account, to which many of the most powerful emotions and faiths would appertain would nevertheless still be recognized as tentative; that is, as subject to revision with the advance of experience and of discovery in objective knowledge.

So much by way of introductory remarks on the questions of the infinity versus the finiteness of nature. Let us now inspect our actual knowledge of nature for the purpose of seeing what it indicates in this respect.

## 4\.

Surely what we know about the portion of the Cosmos which we call living, when regarded in all its aspects --- its paleontology, its morphology, its embryology, its biochemistry, its physiology, its psychology, its sociology --- points considerably more strongly toward infinity than toward finiteness. For example, let one put to himself the question, what do the observations so far made on the minute structure of organic beings _while they are still organized_, indicate as to there being parts of organisms so small that there are none still smaller; or in other words, as to there being truly unorganized living substance: Is it not true that all notions about ultimate organic particles and substances rest upon something else than actual observations on organic beings _while they are still organized_? In recent times, for instance, such notions, so far as they have been favored by biologists, have rested largely on inferences drawn from a science, chemistry, very closely interlocked with, but by no means the same as biology. It cannot be too strongly emphasized that our knowledge of the chemistry of organic beings is derived almost entirely from observations on a. the dead bodies of organisms; b. materials extraneous to living beings which may be taken up by them and worked over in one way and another to their needs; c. waste and excrementitious material thrown off by living bodies. Our knowledge of the chemistry of living substance based on direct chemical studies of such substance is almost nil. To permit, therefore, inferences drawn from chemistry and physics to fix a minimal size for living particles, while biological knowledge proper furnishes no warrant for such limitation, would be to go head-on against one of the most cherished tenets of physical science --- the trustworthiness of observational evidence. Now I wish to be very explicit in denying that my contention is that the observed biological facts _prove_ the illimitableness in size of organic particles. What I say is, that those facts furnish no warrant for the hypothesis of minimal sized particles; and that consequently, if we are to make any hypothesis on the subject at all, that of illimitableness is far better grounded than its opposite.

Highly significant is the fact that observations, in the realm of minute organisms themselves, as contrasted with that on the particles of which organisms are composed, tend with equal persuasiveness toward denial of the necessity of supposing the existence, taking the whole cosmos together, of minimal sized organisms. The recent extension of knowledge in the field of pathogenic ultramicroscopic organisms, and in that of the so-called nanoplankton, is very suggestive. It seems that some of the most illuminating biological research in the not distant future may be in these realms. The facts are much the same in these two realms, but being more familiar with nanoplankton than with pathogenic organisms, I leave the latter to one side. The case stated in a nutshell is this: one of the largest aspects of the history of research on the free floating and swimming life of the waters of the earth, particularly those of the oceans, has consisted in the making known of ever smaller and smaller organisms, occurring generally in greater and greater numbers of individuals. And here is the significant thing: At any given time during this history, the minutest organisms known were determined solely by the degree of perfection of the means employed for capture and observation. Every step forward in the refinement of methods of collecting and studying has been rewarded by the discovery of still more minute beings. This has gone on until today any experienced investigator in this field who might be confronted with the question:--- What is the smallest organism that lives in the sea? would, I believe, have to reply that there is no evidence in all the extensive knowledge now possessed concerning the living things of the waters of the earth, on which to base a positive answer to the question; in other words he would have to give an answer, the implication of which is that probably there is no such thing as a smallest organism in these waters. Undoubtedly the interrogated student might go on and show by a course of reasoning based on certain facts that there _must_ be a minimal size somewhere. But the facts upon which that reasoning would be founded would not be derived from observation on the organisms of the waters, nor even on a study of phenomena of the same order as those essentially involved in the question. In a word, the "logical necessity" of belief in minimal-sized organisms would be an _a priori_ necessity. It would be a logical necessity if one were to choose premises to start with that would make it so, not otherwise.

I must repeat what my position is. I do not for a moment contend that an infinite series of organic beings of diminishing size is proved by the evidence before the court. My point is, that if we are to hold any hypothesis at all as to size limitation, the direct evidence for illimitableness is far stronger than that for limitation. Indeed, all the direct evidence points to this conclusion while only indirect evidence favors the hypothesis of limitation.

As this communication has to do only with great problems in their baldest outlines, details cannot be entered into.

Weighing of evidence bearing on either one or the other of the hypotheses here mentioned is consequently out of the question. Attention must nevertheless be called to one matter of detail that seems pot to have received the attention it deserves in recent discussions of the so-called pan-spermia idea; namely, the importance of distinguishing between germinal, or reproductive _elements_ of organisms, in the usual sense, and organic beings _regardless_ of particular stages in the life cycle of organisms, as the means of interplanetary and interstellar migration. Putting the pan-spermia hypothesis squarely on this broader basis (which would at once render the term pan-spermia too narrow as a designation for the idea) would extend the boundaries of the problem by the frank recognition that our knowledge of the extent of adaptability of the organic world _as a whole_, and of the numerical abundance of organisms in organic nature _as a whole_, is still so imperfect as to warn us against dogmatic denials of possibilities involving questions of adaptiveness and abundance. If physics and astronomy will provide a means of transport of objects, organic or inorganic, across the intervals between heavenly bodies, genuine biology will be the last to assert the impossibility of the existence of organisms that can endure such transportation and the assumed colonization upon the various heavenly bodies. And biology will leave to men of other domains of science who get such biological knowledge as they have by "reading up," the task of disposing of the pan-spermia suggestion, for biology has more reason than perhaps any other science to take notice of the extent to which modern civilization rests upon principles and truths that a few years earlier were _a priori_ impossible.

## 5\.

I now return to my original purpose --- that of seeking information as to how verified knowledge and careful thinking on the main questions in the realm of the inorganic, really stand today. I will arrange my remaining questions in a series beginning with the most general and ending with the most special, and will focus the inquiries as sharply as possible.

A physicist* of high standing has lately said, "The universe must have begun by a process which lies outside physical laws, and it seems to me no easier to grasp the conception of a creation which took place at one single time than a creation which continues throughout all ages." Is, I ask, the conception that "The universe must have begun by a process which lies outside physical laws" regarded by physicists generally as established beyond the possibility of overthrow or even of revision? Sir Oliver Lodge remarks immediately after quoting the above, that in this, as in a few other matters, he is imable to follow the author. What particular items in the passage the reviewer dissents from he does not, unfortunately, tell us.

*) Arthur Schuster, F. R. S., _The Progress of Physics during Thirty-three Years_ (1875-1908), reviewed and quoted by Sir Oliver Lodge, _Nature_, September 21, 1911.

Let it be supposed that all men's minds are so similar to Professor Schuster's that theirs, like his, find it "no easier to grasp the conception of a creation which took place at one single time than a creation which continues throughout all ages." Limitation here on the power of "grasping" in all probability refers to two hypotheses of creation having the common element of striving after a grand final of understanding; an understanding, that is, that leaves nothing beyond to be sought or desired or imagined. Alternative hypotheses into which are put this common element are certainly equally hopeless, equally blank, and equally useless at least so far as this element is concerned. But since hypotheses, that is, interrogative conceptions held about things, are of our own making, why put elements into them that balk us at the very start? Why should one announce a foot race and make ready for it by attaching weights to his feet so heavy that he could not stir a foot, tug as hard as ever he might?

If one does his questioning about creation more modestly but no less earnestly, he finds, especially if he be a biologist, that the way of "a creation which continues" is far more open and easy to travel, than that of a creation "at one single time," for on the first way he sees every day creation actually going on even though he does not understand exactly how it goes. But the way of creation "at one single time," --- well, indeed, what is it and where is it? We are not able to plant our feet securely on it anywhere. Surely this difficulty is very different from that noted about the first way, namely, that of the continuance of creation "throughout all ages." That the creation has continued and will continue forever we certainly do know. But the two indubitable facts 1. that it has gone on for a very long time and 2. that it shows no clear symptoms of termination, furnish no warrant for the supposition that it ever did begin absolutely or will ever end absolutely.

Another physicist, M. Gustave Le Bon, who has attracted much attention among his fellow workers, in part favorable and in part unfavorable, heads one of the main sections of his recent volume, _The Evolution of Forces_, --- "The Dematerialization of Matter and the Problems of Electricity." My meager knowledge of physics is greatly perplexed not only by this expression, but by many others scattered through this book and also _The Evolution of Matter_ by the same author. That my knowledge of physics is "meager" might be held to be a sufficient explanation of my being perplexed; and a pertinent suggestion would be that I either resolve the perplexities by getting more knowledge or saying nothing about my troubles, at least in print. I should accept the latter alternative were it not for the fact that in the troublesome expressions there is surely involved exceedingly important questions not merely of physics but of procedure in the acquirement of knowledge in any realm of nature whatever. On this ground I feel justified in appealing to physicists by direct inquiry, in this public way for the assistance which in spite of considerable effort, I have been unable to get by reading. I can, perhaps, state my difficulty clearly by asking, What, exactly, is the meaning to the physicist _as such_ of the phrase, "the dematerialization of matter"? To me, an observer in another realm of nature, who has tried hard to find just what he does when he observes and reasons on what he observes, the "dematerialization of matter" means the de-sensibilization of sense and the de-intellectualization of intelligence.

Looking the whole situation over from my standpoint, I see it this way: We students of nature all find in actual practice that Matter is always "matter _of_" some very obvious, easily seen, and handled body. No laboratory or museum so far as I have seen or heard contains a specimen of raw, pure Matter. Judging from the constant occurrence of the word _body_ in his writings, M. Le Bon would grant this without hesitation. Consequently if we never find any matter elsewhere than in bodies, and if we are never able to resolve a body into pure Matter, then, it would seem, pure Matter is non-existent so far as observational knowledge is concerned; and practically the phrase dematerialized matter would be synonymous with debodified body. But all bodies are partly sensible, that is, recognizable by our senses or would be if our senses were sharp enough. So I see no escape, psychological or logical, from the conclusion that the words "dematerialization of matter" are, not sarcastically nor ironically, but literally _non_-sense.

If physicists as physicists have a way out of this difficulty I wish it could be shown to me. But I strongly suspect they have none. This suspicion has been aroused not alone from confidence in my own starting point and reasoning, but by expressions which I have found in the writings of several physicists that seem to indicate a failure on their parts to distinguish between the _dissociation_ of a body and the _separation_ from it of some of its attributes. I am quite sure M. Le Bon has fallen into this logically bottomless pit. On page 110 of the _Evolution of Forces_, after speaking of efforts to interpret the cathode rays, radio-active emissions and so on, he says: "Whatever this interpretation may be worth, it was certain that simple bodies could be dissociated." And on the following page we find: "All these experiments, many of which showed us particles of electricity freed from their material support," etc. And on page 106 we find the "cat let out of the bag" still more positively in the statement that "Charges of electricity and the manner in which they are distributed generate all the properties of bodies," etc.

As already indicated, the exact strength of the experimental evidence on which such statements rest, I am not at all competent to estimate. This however I am sure of: If it really does express the truth as to the way bodies and thus all nature is constituted, then the foundation of all our physical science is "thought waves" or "moon shine" or something else equally substantial, and the vast superstructure, magnificent and solid as we have supposed it to be, will collapse into a heap of chaotic nothingness sooner or later.

I am not speaking with intent of irony or jocularity or to exaggerate. The mode of reasoning about nature employed by M. Le Bon, would, I am persuaded, if followed rigorously, destroy physical science and erect on its ruins some form of mysticism. It would sooner or later convert every great seat of western learning into a Buddhist temple, or a home of some other type of occult philosophy. And no great acumen is required to recognize tendencies of just this kind not only in the popular favor bestowed of late upon various forms of Inner Wisdom, but even in the utterances of men high in scientific authority and sometimes in official place. One may hunt _The Secret Doctrine_ of Mme. Blavatsky from cover to cover and find nothing more truly occult than these sentences from _The Evolution of Matter_: "In thus endeavoring to catch a glimpse of the origins of matter, of its evolution and of its end, we have step by step arrived at the extreme limits of those semi-certitudes to which science can attain, and beyond which there is nothing but the darkness of the unknown." The "origin" and the "end" here referred to are the emergence of matter from the "primitive ether" "in the far-off ages when the first traces of our universe were out-lined on the chaos," and its return again to the ether, this last representing therefore "the final nirvana to which all things return after a more or less ephemeral existence." Nor has M. Le Bon failed to show us by what knowledge-process he finds himself compelled to place the brand of "semi-certitude" on the science for which he stands. Hypothesis, he says, "is the magic wand which evokes the known from the unknown, the real from the unreal, and gives a body to the most shadowy chimeras." Although science he says, "is the daughter of experiment," still hypothesis comes first, "To make hypotheses, to verify them by experiments, then to attempt to connect by the aid of generalizations, the facts discovered represents the stages necessary for the building up of all our knowledge." On what the hypotheses rest we are not told, but seemingly not on observations, for, he says, while science lives on facts, "it has always been great generalizations which have given them birth."

It is a satisfaction to know that the great domain of physics is not wholly permeated by such a conception of its own knowledge-processes as that here indicated; to know, in other words, that not all physical theory is a sort of bottomless pit into which physical facts are thrown. The introduction to the volume on electric energy of the monumental _Traité de Physique_ by O. D. Chwolson furnishes one piece of evidence to this effect.

Speaking of the present state of electrical and magnetic science, this author recognizes three ways of approach to the field as a whole. The first of these, characterized as the first point of view, is that of the "external structure," and the "description of the phenomena." Concerning this we read: "It is very important to note that the whole 'ensemble scientifique' which characterizes this first point of view in the study of electrical and magnetic phenomena is entirely independent of the opinions which may prevail among scientists regarding the nature of the phenomena."

The third point of view, the author says, is that of the "attempt to explain the phenomena." Then, concerning the first and third points of view we find: "Without any exaggeration it can be said, after a rapid survey of the facts, that there does not exist at present in the part of this science which has for its object the explanation of phenomena, any single well established theory which can be depended upon to explain completely and with certainty all of the phenomena."

Were physics to accept whole-heartedly, not only what is here said, but the logical consequences of it, I am quite sure it would find itself with a theory of its own knowledge not differing essentially from that expressed and implied in my discussion.

M. Le Bon seems to have failed completely to recognize the fundamental, the essential, _reciprocal_ relation between fact and generalization; between observation and hypothesis. Either he has never undertaken seriously to test the relative validity of observational or inductive, and subjective or deductive knowledge, or if he has undertaken the task, he has made a sad failure of it.

If physical science ("so-called," we should need to remark) has proved beyond a peradventure that there is something in the world real in so peculiar a way as to make this table on which I now write and this rose perfume which now enters my nostrils, unreal or even "semi-certain," then indeed is the end of physical science in sight, for the reality thus discovered can be reached just as well by way of the temple of mystic religion or the closet of meditation as by way of the field, the mountain, the ocean, and the scientific laboratory; and mighty few mortal beings are going to endure the expense, the disagreeable odors, the perplexities, and the disappointments of the chemical and the biological laboratory if they can reach the same end by the monetary cheapness, the savory incense, the monotonous and often repeated formulary, the impassive meditation, and the inner assurance, of the mystic Temple.

The quintessence of the thing, as illustrated by the problem of the nature of electricity, is this: Whatever else _physical_ science may be it is _verified sense_ experience. From the days of Franklin and of Volta to our own an immeasurably vast amount of such experience has been to the effect that magnetism and electricity are attributes or properties of bodies. Slight as was my training in these provinces, and faded as are most of the facts and mathematical equations presented to me in my college days, very distinct pictures are still before my mind of sticks of sealing wax, chunks of amber, the skins of various small animals tanned with the hair on, pieces of flannel cloth, scraps of pith, bars of iron of various shapes and sizes, and so on, whenever the subject of magnetism was up for treatment; and big, flat, thin, semitransparent wheels set in frames, like a grindstone and adjusted with reference to certain bars and balls of brass, glass jars containing metal plates, smelly fluids, yards of copper wire and numerous other things, whenever we were to have a lesson in electricity.

From what I see all around, mammoth dynamos in the great "Power Plants," "dry cells" and "wet cells," little and big, some of glass, some seemingly of paper, some cylindrical, some rectangular, miles upon miles of big copper wire, and yards upon yards of little copper wire, I judge that in the overwhelming majority of instances it is still true that "no bodies, no electricity." This, according to my understanding, is merely stating in more general terms Faraday's famous principle that the "quantity of electricity passing through a liquid is proportional to the matter deposited on the electrodes." But it appears that within the last ten or fifteen years several persons, perhaps a half dozen in each of the countries where science has reached its highest development, have had sense experiences, that is, have made observations, and have done some mathematical calculating which they think means electricity without "material support"; in other words, that electricity is not, after all, an attribute of material bodies, but virtually the reverse of this; namely, that the electricity generates the attributes of such bodies. We can not look at this situation too carefully. If electricity generates all the attributes of material bodies, it generates the bodies themselves so far as physical science is concerned; for these attributes are exactly the foundation upon which observational knowledge rests. It seems that these persons are not only putting the "cart before the horse" but are proving that that is where the horse belongs.

This is not primarily a question of whether Dr. Y --- or Dr. Z --- is the more skillful and trustworthy as a deviser and maker and user of apparatus for testing hypotheses; that is to say, a question of which doctor is the better observer, pertinently as this must come in. Rather it is primarily a question of the nature and validity of any observational knowledge whatever. The fundamental proposition, surely implied though not definitely expressed, is that observation no matter how many times confirmed is not after all a reliable and essential part of science. The conception is undoubtedly implied that the water-falls, the dynamos, the copper wires, the transformers and all the rest, inseparably connected with electricity in practical life are not real in the sense that the electricity is real; that the water-falls, dynamos, copper wires, et cetera, are at bottom the electricity itself under a different form. The sense world of ordinary mortals is an illusion or a delusion --- and the occultists are right:--- Mental Science, not Physical Science, is the "Real Thing."

From these and other considerations on the psychological-logical side of all this, I am led to suggest --- though the suggestion is rather audacious --- that there may be one or more "[elephants in the room]" on the purely physical side. Is it possible that one of these is in the electro-magnetic theory of light? As I understand, the main support of this theory is the demonstration that the electric charge moves at nearly the same velocity that light does. The reasoning is captivating and as a feat of "pure" reasoning, quite convincing: "The mass of an electric charge depends on the velocity and increases indefinitely as this velocity approaches that of light. --- The material mass is therefore nil," and "the electron must be looked upon as a simple electric charge devoid of matter."*

But what about light? There surely is an enormous amount of every day experience to the effect that it too is wholly dependent upon bodies; in a word that it is an attribute of bodies. True there have been reports from time to time of strange, mysterious lights --- lights not connected with any material body. But such reports, less frequent now than formerly, have usually been based on observations which from the circumstances under which they were made, did not appear trustworthy, and have never, I believe, been rigidly verified. To some readers it may seem that I am here being sarcastic. But assuredly I am not. Whatever suggestion of sarcasm there may be inheres in the situation and is not put into it by me. According to my understanding of nature generally and the sensory and mental processes by which we know it, electricity with no material support has exactly the same status as has light with no material support. Neither one stands up under the test of common experience. So I must conclude that the few doctors of electricity and the few religious ascetics who have originated such ideas have both misqueued in some way. It is not alone for the physicist but equally for the logician of the natural sciences to point out the enormous difference there is between the question of how light gets across the interval between one body and another, and that of the ultimate nature of light. I can go from La Jolla to San Diego with my automobile in the same time that the steam rail-road trains requires to run between those same places; so, taking the journey as a whole, the two vehicles have the same velocity. But this does not prove that the automobile and the train are the same thing, nor does it give any information about many matters connected with the journeys. For instance it tells nothing about the course followed by each vehicle, nor anything as to how many more times the train stopped on the way than did the automobile.

*) _The New Physics_ by M. Lucian Poincare, p. 315.

The lately revised views about physical "relativity" seem to greatly strengthen my general position. I have read a little of the extensive literature that is accumulating on this subject, and do not fully understand most of the experimental evidence and mathematical reasoning involved. The psychological and logical import of the results seem, however, fairly clear: We must accustom ourselves to regarding not only electricity and light, but also time, as attributes of material bodies. No bodies, no electricity; no bodies, no light; and likewise, as the new discoveries clearly indicate, no bodies, no time. But we can not stop here. Kant was entirely right in tying space and time inseparably together however wide of the mark he came in his way of disposing of the pair after he had tied the knot. Experimental demonstrations that require us to regard time as an attribute of material bodies, will, I am satisfied also require us to regard space as an attribute of material bodies.

Even yet the end of the road is not reached. Notice that it is not sufficient to say no _body_, no light, and no _body_, no time. There must always be _bodies_ --- two at the very least. So the next, and for the logician and philosopher, by far the most important step is this: No bodies, no _reality_; or, saying the same thing in another way, reality itself is an attribute of material bodies.

The problem here raised, momentous not only for human intellect but for human conduct, can not be grasped by a few minutes' thinking. Nevertheless one of its wider bearings I am going to touch upon. Students of philosophy ought to be and many of them undoubtedly are, greatly interested in what men of science are doing on the frontiers of the various provinces of natural knowledge. Windelband has remarked in the brief chapter of his _History of Philosophy_, "The Philosophy of the Nineteenth Century," that "the historical and natural science modes of viewing the world seem to have drawn as near together as is possible without a new philosophical Idea that shall grasp them both." And he speaks of the "natural-science mode of cognition."

## 6\.

I am not going to call up Philosophy on the telephone, and inform her that Science has at last discovered the long sought "Philosophical Idea," the possession of which will entirely remove the strained relations which have existed for a century between the two earlier friends. Nor am I going to champion a "natural-science mode of cognition" that is wholly unique, that has no counterpart in any realm other than that known to text-books as natural science. I would, however, earnestly suggest not to professional scientists alone, but to all who profess to live rationally and efficiently, that if they will give attention to the question of just what they do in the business of living, and just how they proceed in getting information and understanding concerning the various things entering into the round of daily life, they will find themselves in possession of what may properly be called a philosophical Idea that will grasp a very large part of both the historical and the natural science "modes of viewing the world."

Some of the most basal constituents of this Idea will he found to be not the far-away, hard-to-manage, bloodless "postulates," "concepts," "axioms," "categories" and the rest, that enter so largely into both the Philosophy and Science of the schools. Rather some of the simplest, commonest practices and experiences of every day will be seen to be entitled to places of honor far higher than those now given them. Four only of these constituents do I mention.

The first is the fact of recognizing ordinary sense objects, and calling them by their accepted names. In some of the sciences notably anthropology, zoology, botany, geography, geology, mineralogy, and, really, chemistry, these vulgar, more or less despised operations have been refined until their original character is somewhat obscured by the technical terms description, definition, and classification. One of the most vital things to get hold of is that in all this business the attributes, or properties, or qualities of bodies are what every one is dealing with all the time.

The second constituent is the fact, recognized more clearly by chemistry than by any other science, that all the attributes of bodies fall into two great groups, namely, those of individuation, or present identification; and those of relation. Attributes of the first group are those by which we recognize a body here and now. For example, the form, color, size, and weight, etc., of a crystal of table salt, a piece of soap, a stick of wood, and a human being, are attributes of the first group. They have a considerable persistence and serve to individuate the bodies. The solubility of the salt, the lather-producing power of the soap, the inflammability of the wood, and the capacity for romantic love of the human being, are attributes of the second group, since they are never revealed or operative until the bodies are brought into a particular relation with other bodies. The line of separation between the two groups is not hard and fast. Such lines never are in natural classification. The grouping is useful, especially in chemistry, but is applicable to nearly as great advantage in other sciences. For instance if applied carefully and rigorously in the sciences of human society it would lead to the recognition of the fact that philosophical anarchism, along with all the truth it contains, contains also the deadly mistake of fixing its eyes on man's attributes of identification and individuation almost exclusively. At the same time it would lead to recognition of the fact that philosophical socialism makes the diametrically opposite but equally deadly mistake of fixing its eyes almost exclusively on man's attributes of relation.

The third constituent in this idea that might do so much for us, is the fact that seemingly no two individual bodies ever have quite the same attributes. The biological sciences furnish the most striking illustration of this, the differences or "variations" among living beings having become enormously important especially since Darwin used them in the foundation of his doctrine of natural selection.

The fourth and last constituent of the Idea to be noticed is the incalculable extent to which actual observation has proved natural bodies to be composed of other natural bodies, and the fact that these composing bodies always turn out on close examination to have their own attributes just as the composed bodies have. Here again the biological sciences illustrate the fact perhaps the most strikingly, though geology, mineralogy, and chemistry are almost as instructive. Chemistry is particularly instructive since its "ultimate atoms" have been resolved into still smaller bodies, though the extreme minuteness of the small particles with which it deals, has made it impossible thus far to secure very definite observational knowledge of the constitutive attributes of these bodies.

It is the fact that we biologists are forever finding more and more, and smaller and smaller particles entering into the make-up of all the living bodies we know, that led me a few years ago to the conception of _relative_, or _standardized_ reality. The point, as I thought about it, is this: Surely if there is anything real in this world it is a living, healthy, human being. But such a being we undoubtedly know by its attributes, and, pushing the examination rigorously, in no other way. Now when such beings are studied in the way anatomists and physiologists study them, they are found to be made up of myriads of parts, some placed alongside one another in regular but complicated fashion, while others enter into the composition of other parts; all these parts being known to us _by their attributes or properties just as the original being itself was_. In other words, I said to myself, every one of these myriads of composing parts has exactly the same claim to be counted as real as has the living being itself. Concerning the _standardization of reality_, "the expression is suggested by the chemist's process in standardizing solutions; the process, that is, of using a solution of known composition and concentration as a unit of value to which to refer various reactions and processes. The meaning is that whatever criterion of reality you apply to any natural object, that same criterion you must apply to all other natural objects, no matter whether some of these be constituents of others, or stand in some other relation to one another (p. 180)."*

*) "Life from the Biologist's Standpoint," _Pop. Science Monthly_, August, 1909, pp. 174-190.

According to this conception, one does not need necessarily to have any views about the ultimate meaning of _real_. All that is essential to the actual student is that he recognize that in whatever sense he ascribes reality to the living being taken as such, in exactly the same sense he must ascribe reality to the smallest observed or observable particle entering into the make-up of that being.

So we unconsciously adopt for an enormous range of our observational experiences, a standard by which we estimate the reality of bodies and parts of bodies, that standard being the minimum number of the sensible attributes of any particular body that will enable any observer to recognize the body time after time, and will enable other observers to recognize it, it having been described, or defined, by observer number one. However far the student of nature --- of living nature at least --- pushes his observational inquiries, he finds nothing resembling, even remotely, either the ultimate Substance of scholastic metaphysics or the ultimate Atoms or Electrons of present-day physico-chemical metaphysics. And taking the whole situation, observational and rational, into account, he becomes convinced that he is as likely to find the one as the other since there is not the least prospect of finding either.

The burning question of today is. How far can we go in observation, in legitimate inference, and in controlled imagination ever finding more and more and smaller and smaller (or in the opposite direction, larger and larger) sensible bodies; bodies, that is, each possessed of its own attributes and therefore real according to the standard by which so vast a part of the world is accepted as real? Every one knows that this is in essence a very, very old question. The main advantage we of today have in connection with it is that we can ask it with more definiteness than earlier generations could because we have more data on which to base the query.

## 7\.

This brings me to the last of my main questions about things physico-chemical. Exactly what meaning, I wish to know, do chemists generally attach to such formulations as that it would require an infinite time to absolutely purify water of mineral salt dissolved in it; and that the "life of a radio-active element is infinite"? Some chemists, I am aware, hold the view that "infinite" as here used, is an indefinite term signifying merely duration reaching beyond anything we can measure. So we come to the most basal question of this part of our inquiry: If the chemist performs an experiment, that is, makes an observation, and couples with it a mathematical calculation that brings to light a series of phenomena to which he finds no limit, on what ground can he suppose it does have a limit? Surely not on the observations made in that particular case. Accordingly if he holds that a termination would be found could he go far enough, he throws overboard the observations he has made in favor of _a priori_ considerations received from some other source.

It seems clear that some chemists and physicists are unwittingly reasoning in a fashion that would if consistently followed, lay the ax at the very roots of all chemistry and physics. For instance I was shocked a little time since, by reading in an article on Relativity, (excellent for the most part as it seemed to me), that the theory of the conservation of energy rests on negative evidence! I submit that literally it is scientific homicide and suicide combined, to fix attention on the _absolute_ form of statement often given to scientific hypotheses if the positive evidence on which they rest is ignored in favor of the lack of evidence of absolute universality, and if such fixing of attention goes so far as to lead one to assert that the inductions themselves rest on negation. The idea of the conservation of energy is confirmed thousands of times every day in practical life as well as in scientific investigation; and to say it rests on negative evidence simply because it has not been confirmed for all possible cases and for all future time, is to reveal lack of perception of the nature of any scientific evidence whatever, even of deductive evidence, finally.

## 8\.

Unquestionably it is very difficult, indeed it is probably impossible, to form any kind of a mental picture of a succession of bodies growing smaller forever; that is, through endless time. However there are several reflections that help the situation. Of these the most concretely helpful, it seems to me, is that which may be drawn from noticing how exceedingly wide in nature processes run on for a while in a particular, uniform fashion, then, more or less suddenly, undergo a quite radical change to another, as it proves, equally uniform though quite different fashion. The most familiar illustration of what is here referred to is the metamorphoses that occur in so many animals and plants. Undoubtedly the butterfly larva does come to an end in a sense when it undergoes transformation to the fullfledged insect; and the same may justly be said of the boy and girl when at the period of adolescence, they transform into the man and the woman. The physicochemical realm presents a counterpart of this in the socalled critical stage of substances; water changes to vapor at a particular point in going up the temperature scale, and to ice at a particular point in going down the scale. The now famous phase law of Gibbs has, as I understand, to do with phenomena of this sort in general, and I should suppose, may be found to have still greater importance than it now has, as knowledge advances in this realm of the apparent endlessness of physico-chemical processes. In such cases as those referred to, namely, of the purification of water and the emissions of radio-active bodies, analogy would lead one to suppose that after the processes go on up to some particular point of temperature or degree of concentration or pressure, --- presto, something else happens,--- some rather radical change takes place in the course of things about which as yet we know nothing.

So all in all, there would appear ample inductive ground on which to base a "working hypothesis" that the external world, the world of sense, is genuinely infinite; that is, is endless as to its forms, its causes, its powers and its "law and order." This would seem to mean that the outer world of sense is the counterpart of the inner world of imagination and of mathematics; that in whatever direction one may turn in nature for a problem, if he take hold of that problem by the imaginatively qualitative and quantitative handles, he will find himself needing the infinite series of the geometer and the arithmetician. Far more significant for both science and philosophy than has yet been widely recognized is the fact that biologists are being driven, quite against the taste and training of some of us, to appeal more and more to mathematics. Especially significant is the recognition by at least a few biologists that mathematics must be invoked as an _aid to description_.*

*) See for example Raymond Pearl, "Brometric Ideas and Methods in Biology, their Significance and Limitations." _Scientia_, Vol. 10, p. 101.

...
